thornado-xCFC: A Discontinuous Galerkin Method for General Relativistic Hydrodynamics

Core-collapse supernovae (CCSNe) are spectacular laboratories in which the interplay between particles, gravity, and light are essential. We have developed a solver for the general relativistic hydrodynamics (GRHD) equations under the extended conformally-flat condition (xCFC), which is an approximation to GR that has been shown to be appropriate for simulating CCSNe, the target application for our solver. The solver is a part of thornado, an open source neutrino-radiation hydrodynamics code that uses nodal-based discontinuous Galerkin (DG) methods, which break the physical domain up into elements and approximate the solution to the fluid equations in each element with polynomials. We think this will be an improvement on the industry standard finite-volume method because DG methods are well-suited to run on massively parallel computing clusters such as Summit and Frontier and can achieve the high-order accuracy needed to properly resolve turbulence and convection in the flow. We have optimized our solver to run on GPUs and have also coupled it to AMReX, a software framework designed to allow application codes to run in parallel with MPI and make use of block-structured adaptive mesh refinement (AMR), a practical necessity for multi-dimensional CCSN simulations. We have used our solver, coupled to Poseidon, an xCFC gravity solver, to successfully simulate the adiabatic collapse, bounce, and post-bounce evolution of a realistic progenitor using AMR.


With this solver, we investigated the effect of GR on the standing accretion shock instability (SASI), a purely hydrodynamic instability that is seen in CCSN simulations and is believed by some to play a role, along with neutrino-driven convection, in re-energizing the stalled shock---an outstanding problem that has eluded scientists for sixty years. We performed simulations of the SASI using GRHD and GR gravity and compared the results to simulations that used non-relativistic hydrodynamics (NRHD) and Newtonian gravity, but were otherwise equivalent to their GR counterparts. Our study concluded that GR causes the SASI to grow at a slower rate relative to simulations that utilize Newtonian gravity and NRHD. Additionally, we measured the oscillation period of the SASI to be slower in the GR models. These results may have implications for more massive CCSN progenitors, where some studies have found that the SASI may be more important to shock-revival than neutrino-driven convection. These results also carry implications for gravitational wave observations of the SASI, which may rely on an accurate prediction of what the SASI oscillation period should be.
